okay here we are today it's a visitor to
the Tokerau airfield here
it's a crisco inside top to Singh
agricultural aircraft hopefully
including the wind noises it's very
windy today now these are a kind amazing
aircraft to see there's a tip dihedral
see it's 250 something gives the vehicle
stability but also means that there's
more clearance between the tip of the
wing and the ground if you're doing a
lot of low tunes that can be a
life-saving feature so let's have a
close-up look at this thing see what
makes it tick now up front here we've
got a taro prop engine with a constant
speed prop effect it's variable pitch so
they can actually make these things up
they can reverse them if they need to by
putting a reverse pitch on the spot
hopefully before the skies I'll get some
footage showing one doing just there
backing up into this position against
them the drain here
three bladed pot because there's an
awful lot of power there they need to
convert their comparative thrust and you
don't want to have too much in the way
of prop diameter because it limits your
ground clearance and when you're
operating off a rough field or whatever
you want as much ground clearance as you
can get those ones owned by Aero work
limited it's a well known long company
with that long heritage of fertilizing
properties and spraying and agricultural
aviation in New Zealand now up here
we've got the cockpit I'm not going to
climb up there because I don't have a
letter but let you know how hard the
life these things have look at his
leading edge look at this this is the
kind of damage that it's not uncommon
for these things to sustain them it's
still finer that's pretty much the
superficial it's only the leading edge
the spa produces most of the strength in
these wings and let's have a look
underneath it they agricultural aspects
now here we go this is a pump that's
driven by the airflow as the plane moves
through the it's a centrifugal pump
leads it here through these spray booms
and each of these booms has another
little pup on here that does some of the
atomizing of the spray this aircrafts
being used to spray I think copper on
the forestry that we have around here a
lot of plantation forestry and at
certain times of the year the spray
copper to avoid disease
and fungal through all sorts of stuff
like that so the sprays for the health
of the forest notice get in the back and
have a look around and you can see
they've got counterbalanced this fence
is that you on the end of the a linear
stop here spilling out from the wing
that's who the get that would otherwise
be a huge control surfaces
aerodynamically and aesthetically
balanced so it makes it easy for the
pilot to use the controls flaps
quite large flaps as well they they move
out as they come down in the back here
there was a mess of hopper in here you
can see at the top here mess of hopper
that can contain all the spray woody but
this will hold 2.2 tons of spray that's
a lot of weight to add to an aircraft
this size but that's why they have the
big engine up the front and all this
massive wing area so this is an area
where they can store stuff and even
carry people
I don't know if a lab do but they do
carry people sometimes and move down the
back here as you can see proudly New
Zealand and as I say these have good
hard life
not not peppered in anyway so they tend
to maintain them as well as they can
because of you when you flying close to
the ground you don't want to unexpected
things to happen here's the thing that
looks like it's got a covering here to
stop put some pieces from damaging the
leading edge of the top plane because of
course it's right behind the wheels down
here the wheels will kick up stones and
all sorts so without this shield over
the leading edge you could get quite a
bit of damage sustained along here over
a period of time now get you another
look at these pumps they're quite
cleaver quite complicated bits of
equipment not as simple as you might
think
and you'll notice unusual for any
aircraft they have mud flaps because as
I mentioned before you think we get mud
and all sorts of things picked up from
those wheels as you land on sometimes
quite muddy or rotten paddocks so that's
quite a handy feature now one thing I
find rather surprising for an aircraft
like this is the tiny tiny rudder look
how small that rudder is when you think
about it you get off has to be extremely
maneuverable and able to side slip into
landings and so but there isn't
it'll be small rudder it's a tiny
percentage of the total vertical
stabilizer I don't know what that is and
if the pilot comes back I'll try and
interview them and get some insight into
how these things handle and exactly
where that rudder is even effective hope
it would be and as I was saying you want
as much wingtip clearance as you can get
with a plane like this in as you can see
sometimes enough isn't enough up here
you can see some river bits of high-tech
antenna because these things have
onboard GPS guidance certain levels and
display a pattern without wasting any
spray due to overlap or without creating
any get that's all GPS equipped inside
with clipper displays that later see
exactly where you've been and where
you're going now this piece of metal
here I'm not sure what that is but it
wouldn't surprise me if it was a wire
cutter like Helen helicopters because
you're flying in an area where there may
be telephone wires power wires and
agricultural pilots sometimes can't see
those wires I may not even be on map so
that piece of middle there may be to
deflect any wire you're fine to stop it
coming through the canopy and taking off
your head but I'm just piercing there
I'm just suggesting that might be the
case I know that's what they used on the
helicopters and how much fuel will is
carry well it seems to be four tanks
each one capable of holding 142 liters
that one's 141 the back tank front tank
is 142 and I the same on the other side
there's an awful lot of fuel but then
again a powerful gas turbine engine will
use a lot of fuel and here is a nifty
feature if you want to see where your
wheels are and respect to the ground or
ruts or potholes whatever what better
than a wet and a mirror a rear-vision
mirror I guess this one I don't know
where it's gonna show you but maybe I
think actually gives you a look at a
pump as you're in the cockpit you can
look down here and see I don't know
maybe the wheels maybe the pump make
sure everything's ticking over I suppose
but you don't often see rearview mirrors
on full-size aircraft
now it might have a very small rudder
but they have a massive elevator on
these aircraft I guess they need lots of
pitch control because the when you're
flying and cramped conditions you need
to have a responsive aircraft certainly
and pitch so that you can avoid the
ground then you can see here's with most
things a lot of the controls and the
linkages are pretty pretty basic pretty
rudimentary but I guess they were